# A Statement of my Philosophy

# Note for readers:

I am primarily a computer science researcher, but I think it is interesting to consider why I experience the things I experience, and from there, how I should change my experience. \[By ‘change my experience’ I include any type of decision, whether its impact is in changing how I think about the world (e.g., adopt new shortcuts/frameworks for thinking), or physically changing the world I live in (change what food I eat / what work I do); I refer to these considerations as ‘philosophy’.\] I am sharing my philosophy in order to attract the attention of others who similarly find these questions interesting, to engage in discussion in order to improve my answers to these questions, and out of the vanity of sharing ideas I have put a significant amount of effort into (though perhaps not efficiently) since I first started writing down similar thoughts when I was 13\. Feel free to contact me to discuss any related ideas :D

## Disclaimers:

**Relationship to other lines of thought:** When developing my philosophy, extensive reference to existing philosophy was not one of my priorities :P. It will not be wrong to say that I take some pleasure in coming up with my philosophy ‘by myself’, though that sentiment is neither truly accurate (ideas from various philosophies have permeated society), nor efficient (there are clearly more efficient methods if the goal was simply to reach some conclusion). It is simply the way I have carried out my work, and I seek in the near future to be more knowledgeable regarding the thoughts of others. I cannot identify with great confidence the points of similarity and dissimilarity with existing philosophies. I have heard from people I have talked to that parts of this philosophy has flavors of phenomenalism, desire fulfillment theories of well-being, Hume’s metaphysics, some forms of utilitarianism, and ideas similar to Kant’s apriori (but again unable to guarantee that this is accurate as of now; I am gradually reading more and will hopefully have an answer to this in the future); I’ve also been told that it is likely not fully equivalent to any of these philosophies, as the thoughts of minds are varied and the space of possible philosophies is large. I have met people who did not share my views, and I have before convinced others of my position, (after 30 or 40 hours of discussion), and consider my conclusions to be non-trivial, at least to people whose primary occupation is not philosophy. If you have not thought about similar ideas before, I hope my philosophy changes your understanding. If you have already seen similar ideas, I hope my philosophy is fresh in some ways, if not, I hope it gives some insight into the way I approach the world should you for some reason be interested in knowing\!

**Prediction of future changes:** This is the statement of what I currently believe, according to our experience and the limits of my reasoning, both of which may be flawed. In addition, I have come to find that generally, whenever I think I have found some correct philosophy, I will soon discover problems within it. I will update my claims if new evidence contradicts my previous claims; I’ll also be continuously polishing the wording of my claims. **The current version can be considered a rough draft which includes the core assumptions underlying how I think, and I plan to add case studies applying my philosophy to specific questions in the future**. All previous public versions should be available through github. 

**Choice of words:** I will create some new vocabulary and use words in unconventional ways; I try to define them if that is the case, but some inference based on context may be necessary. Send me a message if something is sufficiently confusing. I sometimes make use of the word ‘I’ rather than ‘we’, I hope it is not jarring as I am describing only my philosophy. 

# Approach:

I attempt to build philosophy ‘from the ground up’, by making as few assumptions as possible. For example, when building the foundations of this philosophy, I assume only what can hardly be doubted, which I consider only to be our experience. I do not assume the existence of the objective world. The goal of my philosophy is to be a philosophy that is most aligned with our experience (including our experience of our memories). In my philosophy there is a hierarchy of what is most important to align with, which is dependent on our experience of what is most unavoidable. For example, one level removed from direct unavoidable experience we have our imperfect understanding of the unavoidable mechanisms of thought that we are forced to interpret our experience with, which we describe crudely with terms such as ‘induction’, ‘non-contradiction’. Many levels down from this is our conjecture that there is a material world, and that our minds are part of that material world. However, if any of our conclusions from lower levels contradict with the more unavoidable parts of our experience, then it shows that the lower levels imperfectly capture our unavoidable experience. For example, we unavoidably think we have free will, yet if we assume the material world is how the world operates, then clearly free will does not exist in the way we unavoidably experience. In this case, our decisions should be made by aligning with our unavoidable experience of free will, rather than our far removed model of the material world, which is a much less unavoidable experience. Of course, it is perfectly fine to use the material world as a model to predict the future, if we care about the future as it is the best one that we have, yet we simply must realize it is a model that is imperfect and contradictory in regards to fully modeling our experience, and so whenever it contradicts with our unavoidable experience, we should defer to our unavoidable experience. The fact that the material world view contradicts our unavoidable experience also shows that our experience is not modeled by the material world (I have heard this is similar to the idea of the ‘hard problem of consciousness’). You can also think of it as the following: the material world could be perfectly consistent and non-contradictory with itself, however, we have access only to our experience and conduct actions motivated only by our experience, and if the material world contradicts our experience, then we must prefer our unavoidable experience over our more avoidable experience of our imperfect model of the material world imperfectly predicts about how we should act. 

# Foundations:

The core foundation of my philosophy can be expressed in the following sentences:

The foundation of everything we know is **experience.**   
The goal-of-life is to align with the **alignment-requiring aspects of experience**.  
The goal-of-philosophy is to **find out how to live, i.e., how to follow the goal-of-life**   
We can make use of reasoning in order to accomplish the goal-of-philosophy.

## Justification for foundations:

### Justifying: The foundation of everything we know is experience**.** 

You can prove to yourself whether this is true by asking if there is anything that you know which is not based on experience. (You, as in the aware-thing that feels that it can make decisions). 

Responses to possible objections:

**Can we not overturn experience with truth?**  
Suppose, in my experience, I see that the sun is red. However, I ‘know’ that the sun is actually only appearing red due to atmospheric interference, and is in fact white. This seems to defeat the idea that truth comes from experience: but it does not.   
It is still true that ‘I see that the sun is red’, and the further truth that the sun is ‘in fact white’ is due to a series of separate experiences and reasoning, and makes a new statement that does not contradict the original. The new statement is something like this: ‘if I were in space, then I would see that the sun is white’. What it overturns is the implicit assumption that because ‘I see that the sun is red’, then no matter where I go (even in space), I will ‘see that the sun is red’.  
By definition, nothing can ever overturn the fact that I experienced ‘the sun is red’, just that what I experienced is more accurately described as ‘while on earth, I experienced that the sun is red’, and what was wrong is not my experience, but my inaccurate description of what I experienced, and my inaccurate logical inference from that experience.    
One can also see this distinction by realizing the difference between beliefs and experiences. I have experienced seeing a red sun, it has led to a false belief that ‘the sun is red’ (which is a generalization of my experience automatically created due to some habits of thinking that humans seem to have), my further reasoning and observations have corrected the mistaken belief that ‘the sun is red’, but has not contradicted my previous experience. 

**Why is experience the ultimate source of everything we know, rather than reasoning/logic?**  
I use reasoning in order to arrive at truth as well, however, I only know that reasoning is reliable because we have an experience of *feeling* that correct reasoning is reliable. For example, the experience of ‘the feeling that a contradictory statement is unintelligible’. Reasoning produces an experience that includes ‘the experience of reasoning’ and ‘the conclusion of reasoning’ (i.e., reasoning produces further experiences). 

### Justifying: The goal-of-life is to align with the alignment-requiring aspects of experience.

The central claim of my system is that “**The goal-of-life is to align with the alignment-requiring aspects of experience (ARAE)**” or phrased in another way “**The goal-of-life/action is to align with our motivations**”. I use ARAE rather than ‘motivation’ in order to highlight the importance of experience, and stay away from some of the common connotations of the word ‘motivation’; I also do not use the word ‘desires’ for a similar reason. You can convince yourself of my claim by asking whether you (the aware-thing) would do anything (including making the decision to think) without ARAE/motivation. I consider the answer to be an emphatic ‘no’, and that is my cause for thinking that the goal-of-life is to align with ARAE. 

**Defining ARAE.** Although everything is from experience, based on my experience and reasoning, I can make a special distinction for experiences that I call ‘alignment-requiring aspects of experience’ (ARAE). ARAE are experiences that motivate action. For example, when we experience that we ‘see a hamburger in front of us’, it is simply an experience, but the experience that ‘I want to satisfy my hunger’ is an ‘alignment-requiring aspect of experience’ (ARAE). Further, there is also a distinction between ‘the experience that I am hungry’, which is not an ARAE, and ‘the experience that I want to satisfy my hunger’, which is an ARAE – this point seems subtle but is important when we talk about our experience of reasoning. 

**Avoidable and unavoidable experiences.** ARAE are experiences, and by our will and thoughts, one imagines that one can alter one’s experience of ARAE. The degree to which one’s will can alter one’s experience of a ARAE is the avoidability of that ARAE. For example, by thinking, you can reduce your desire for junk foods or desire for supporting various political movements, based on facts. However, there are parts of certain ARAE (and experiences) that cannot be easily or at all avoided by the application of the will and thoughts. For example, the experience of having free will, the ARAE of not wanting to die, and the ARAE of not wanting to feel pain. 

**Reasoning-derivative and non-reasoning-derivative experiences.** Some ARAE/experiences are reasoning-derivatives of other ARAE/experiences in the following sense: you experience this ARAE/experience ***because*** you have reasoned so from some other ARAE/experiences. The word **because** must be defined carefully, here, it is meant in the sense that if you were to no longer experience a belief in the chain of reasoning, then you will lose the ARAE. In these cases, it is possible simply and easily use your thoughts in order to align with or get rid of the ARAE, and you should do so as soon as possible. For example, if you feel the ARAE of shouting at Bob because you believe they hurt your friend Alice, and then find out that they were not the one actually responsible, you can quickly resolve the ARAE of shouting at Bob. There are many ARAE/experiences for which this does not apply, for example, the experience of pain, the experience of free will, and the ARAE of wanting to live. 

**Alignment with ARAE intrinsically interacts with time.** When I say alignment with ARAE, I include the ARAE that I predict I will experience in the future. ARAE are in general all statements about the future: the ARAE ‘I want to satiate my hunger’ assumes that I will still care about satiating my hunger in the future, by motivating an action that will satiate my hunger, which can only affect the future. I will describe another way to see this in the section regarding reason. 

**The meaning of Alignment.** ‘Alignment’ with ARAE is not the fulfillment of ARAE at the immediate moment as usually conceived. It is also possible to ignore some ARAE if other ARAE are stronger and opposed to them. It is possible to suppress experiences that produce such ARAE so you can predictably not encounter them in the future. All such methods are valid ways of aligning with the ‘alignment-requiring aspects of experience’ (ARAE). For example, if one of your ARAE is to be healthy and you predict that you will experience the ARAE of wanting to eat junkfood when you see it, then you can decide using your will to take certain physical actions that reduce your encounters with the junkfood eating ARAE (e.g., storing junk foods in harder to reach places). 

**The central imperative.** Alignment with ARAE is something like reducing the ‘flaring up’ or activation of the ARAE and the predicted future occurrence of ARAE. Whenever it is possible to reduce an ARAE, you should take whatever means to reduce it – that is the motivation behind your actions and your thoughts. Your will has most direct access to what you think, this means that in thinking, your goal is to try to get rid of as many ARAE as possible. You take actions to get rid of the ARAE that can not be aligned with easily simply by your thoughts alone. 

Responses to possible objections:

**Why do I choose this basis for my system, rather than something like ‘The goal-of-life is to Maximize Pleasure’ or ‘The goal-of-life is to find \<insert abstract concept, e.g., Truth\>’?**   
It is because of my empirical **experience** that we take actions due to things that do not maximize pleasure, and we take actions due to things that do not seek truth; yet every action we conduct by conscious decision making is due to motivations. More or less states of ‘pleasure’ may be detectable, but nothing motivates you to pursue ‘pleasure’ if you have no ARAE for increasing pleasure. In that sense, it is possible for some people to not chase pleasure (e.g., monks). 

### Justifying: The goal-of-philosophy is to find out how to follow the goal-of-life

It is possible for other people to have different definitions of philosophy, but I consider philosophy as a way of not only understanding our experience, but prescribing/influencing by that understanding how we ought to change our experience as aware-things. Some people might possibly think that philosophy merely answers the question ‘what is the meaning of life’, but I consider that it also answers ‘so what does that mean for me (the aware-thing)’. I sometimes refers to the decisions of the aware-thing as ‘will’. I consider the prescription as the primary role of philosophy: a philosophy that accurately describes how the world evolves is important only because it allows us to make good prescriptions. You can prove this to yourself by asking: why would you want to have an accurate philosophy? If your answer is ‘because I like understanding the world accurately’, that is still fulfilling an ARAE / motivation – i.e., following the goal-of-life. 

**The meaning of a prescription.** There may be multiple definitions of prescription that we are motivated to consider. What is usually meant by a prescriptive system is the description of the actions (including thoughts) that will be taken given a maximum amount of reasoning, and in some cases, a maximum amount of empirical information. Since the second piece is not really possible in practice, I take *prescription* to mean *given the current empirical information you have about the outside world, but an infinite reasoning budget or complete chain of reasoning* (some certainty that the chain of reasoning cannot be improved upon)*, what should you decide to do?* The desire to find a prescription for what to do, or find what you should do, is one of the fundamental ARAE for humans and is the motivation behind much of human reasoning. So, when we ask how a system is ‘prescriptive’ we are simply asking about how we can best fulfill this ARAE.  
In general, we tend to think that ‘prescription’ implies finding out ‘what should you decide to do’ in a way that is built on correct reasoning. Thus, ‘prescription’ can point towards answers that you would not have obtained had you not thought about ‘prescription’ or ‘what should you decide to do’. This is the way in which prescription differs from description, in description, we analyze what causes us to decide/act in the way that we decide/act, and we do not apply the liberty of assuming an ‘*infinite reasoning budget or complete chain of reasoning’* before we make decisions.  
I justify thinking about prescription just because I am interested in thinking about prescription, i.e., I have the ARAE of wanting to know what I should prescriptively be doing very strongly, and it is possible for me to align with this ARAE by conducting reasoning while aligning with my other ARAE well. And I justify spreading my philosophy because I believe from outside observation that most people have this ARAE of wanting to know what they should prescriptively be doing and that I have the ARAE of wanting people to align with their ARAE. “How one should live life” (thinking about the question of how one should live life) is really one of the most interesting questions in the world, in fact, I think it is the definitive question of life. It is wonderful to answer these questions: what is our life, consciousness, and intelligence?

**All reasoning is based on abstractions of reality**, a perfect reasoning is simply a description of reality, then to prescribe a ‘good system’, we must decide (perhaps arbitrarily) what abstraction we will make.  
The reason that I choose this definition of prescription (which we must recognize to be an abstraction and formal system that does not describe how we actually think \[any system that describes how we really think must be descriptive\]) rather than some goal such as ‘increase material wealth/power’, is that satisfying alignment requiring aspects of experience (ARAE) is a very general idea that when properly done happens to capture and explain most other goals as a part of itself. It is also only one assumption away (the assumption of infinite reasoning time) from the descriptive system of how we act. Another reason why I chose this definition is because when people think of ‘should’, they think it comes from ‘want’, and when they think about ‘better’ they use reasoning to justify better. Therefore, a better philosophy satisfies what people want better. I use ARAE rather than want in order to distinguish from the usual use of the word, which often fails to bring up the notion of what a person wants in the future, and what a person man ostensibly wants for people other than themselves.   
One interesting thing about this definition of prescription, is that it is a descriptive account of what prescription means that seems to be mostly accurate / well captured by language. And it allows a single entryway into what is meant by ‘prescription’, and whenever we reason, we should take care to use as little inaccurate abstraction as possible. 

**Some abstractions of reality are more accurate than others.** Abstractions are more accurate if the conclusions we obtain after reasoning based on these abstractions matches our experience (or memory/concept of past experience). Abstractions tend to enter a reasoning chain when definitions are introduced. The less abstraction we use in reasoning, the more accurate our reasoning tends to be (holding the total accuracy of the reasoning we do on top of the definition constant). 

**The conduct of philosophy.** At all times I should use the best system I have in order to think, I can still question the system, but while thinking and living life, I must use a system, and I should use the best system currently constructed rather than no system.   
Questioning of a system of reasoning (beliefs / assumptions?) must not mean I can no longer use it, because otherwise it makes the act of philosophical inquiry dangerous and directly antithetical to my ARAE and therefore will descriptively cause me to not want to think about philosophy or feel it is sad to think about philosophy. This is because questioning erodes trust in my assumptions, making practical action impossible and sad, as all practical reasoning is based on assumptions.

**Truth-Implication Gap.** You can use your will to change your assumptions. The application of your will to change your assumptions should be justified by your ARAE. E.g., the truth of determinism is not the truth of the lack of the feeling of free will. The implication is not ‘we should do nothing as everything is deterministic’. 

### Justifying: We can make use of reasoning in order to accomplish the goal-of-philosophy.

Reasoning is hard to define, however, it is my experience that there are ways in which we are forced to think that are relatively inescapable. Further, it is my experience that we possess a feeling that something is ‘correct’ or ‘incorrect’, ‘reasonable’ or ‘unreasonable’, with which we can attempt to understand the correct ways to think. As such, to convince yourself that we can use reasoning, ask yourself, other than reasoning/thinking, how can we form new conclusions? My answer to this is that without reasoning/thinking no new conclusions can be obtained other than the mere fact of experience, which entirely removes the possibility of philosophy. Therefore, thinking/reasoning is the only way in which we can accomplish the goal-of-philosophy. 

**Examples of inescapable ways of reasoning.** For example, in my experience we tend to think as if time exists, we tend to think as if space exists, we believe certain things will stay consistent (if we smash a teacup and it hurts, we will assume that smashing a teacup will hurt in the future), we tend to think as if certain things can cause other things to occur, we tend to not be able to conceptualize a contradiction (e.g., this cat is fully white and fully black), we tend to think as if things can exist. There are many more of these ways of thinking which I believe may be of more or less importance, e.g., we can point at a soda can and recognize it as one coherent object and not part of the table it sits on. 

**Properties.** A property of these ‘inescapable ways of reasoning’ is that our ‘reasoning’ tends to operate by following them. Further, when we experience that our reasoning has been conducted in such a way that is inconsistent with them, we can recognize it and take the action of engaging in reasoning again in order to fix that error. \[The mechanism for recognizing that we have reasoned wrongly seems to be that we can try to think/reason about whether our reasoning is wrong, after enough reasoning, it seems that we will have the experience of having the memory that every time we have attempted to reason about a piece of wrong reasoning, we have come to feel that the reasoning is wrong or incomprehensible. I believe the mechanism for recognizing / feeling whether or reasoning is wrong also has something to do with the prediction of the future: it seems that (our experience of memory is that) reasoning correctly allows us to make better predictions of the future.\] 

**Limits of our conception of ‘inescapable ways of reasoning’.** It is also important to note that some ‘inescapable ways of reasoning’ seem more inescapable than others due to our lack of ability to properly define them. I think we can see the outlines of these ‘inescapable ways of reasoning’, but we should not be too hasty in defining them with full specificity. For example, our habit to think that space is euclidean is not an ‘inescapable way of reasoning’, because we can conceptualize non-euclidean space, this means our habit to think that space is euclidean is merely a ‘bias or habit of reasoning’ that we could potentially correct with extensive effort. There are several deeper analyses which I believe we can conduct into the nature of reasoning, but don’t seem currently relevant for making decisions.

(I have heard/read that Kant has some similar ideas called ‘apriori’, as far as I know, they are similar to the idea of ‘inescapable ways of reasoning’ and ‘feeling of correctness’, but unfortunately I have not heard/read enough to guarantee with high confidence that they are equivalent. **For conciseness,** **I will refer to the conception we have of the proper way of reasoning** (i.e., our conception of the ‘inescapable ways of reasoning’) **as** ‘**priors**’)

**The difference between the feeling/experience of contradiction, and the ARAE of ‘wanting to not be contradictory’.** We are able to detect a contradiction as an experience, I refer to this as ‘the feeling that there is a contradiction’, however, we can make the choice of whether or not to correct a line of reasoning which gives us ‘the feeling that there is a contradiction’, our motivation for correcting it is a separate ARAE of ‘the feeling that I want to correct contradictions’. The ‘feeling that I want to correct contradictions’ is generally much weaker than an ARAE like ‘the feeling that I want to satiate my hunger’, especially if the current experience is ‘dying of starvation’. 

**Another way to see that alignment with ARAE interacts with time.** We know we currently have experience, and are forced to reason that by our ‘prior of induction’ and our ‘prior that time exists’ that ‘in the future we will also have experience’. Then we are also forced to reason by induction that in this future experience, we will also have ARAE. Further, since all individual ARAE are statements that inherently assume that we will care about aligning with this ARAE in the future, we can be said to care about the future. 

## Consequences of the Foundations

**What does this philosophy say about how we should make decisions?**  
All justification for action starts from the alignment requiring aspects of experience (ARAE).   
One of our ARAE is caring about the future.  
In conjunction with our prior of time and prior of induction, ‘caring about the future’ justifies us to consider ARAE that we **predict** we will experience in the future as valid ARAE (just discounted a bit due to uncertainty).  
This establishes that **predicting the future** is extremely important to align with ARAE (i.e., fulfill the goal of life).   
Conclusion:  
The strength of the prescriptive justification for a decision is the strength of the ARAE **we** **predict** we will feel both now and in the future *given* the decision. 

**What does this philosophy say about the value of truth?**  
Taking empirical observations of the world and doing logical deduction / reasoning to find the truth (i.e. predict the future) allows us to better fulfill the goal of life. *I.e., the feeling that we care about the future is the reason why we care about predicting the future, and feeling that predicting the future is important is why finding the truth is important. For me, that is the strength of the importance of truth.* 

### Practical Guidelines When Utilizing This System

‘**The way to conduct discussion**’ First, you must set what problem it is that you are trying to solve – this decides the level of abstraction in which to engage in the conversation. When you define a particular thing, **you can be inaccurate in your definition of the thing** (e.g., saying, people dislike (ARAE) their own experience of suffering is more accurate than saying people strongly dislike (ARAE) the suffering of anything they believe has experience. People do dislike the suffering of anything that has experience, but to a lesser degree, and are not forced to perceive it unless they actively use empathy or are triggered to use empathy. On the other hand, their own suffering is more strongly felt and less avoidable.). Thus, you should try to define things accurately such that it does not contradict with your experience of reality (of course, drawing useful boundaries of the definition is another issue, but for now we should content ourselves to prefer more accurate definitions to less accurate ones, especially if the differences will later matter for the problem.) Sometimes, the whole problem/debate is simply to find a more accurate definition of a thing, which may lead to the breaking of some other lines of argument that depended on the less accurate definition. However, if the problem you are trying to solve is a question about ‘how you *should* ask’, or a question of ‘prescription/oughts’, then you must first define what is the source of the prescription. For example, it is possible to define what you should do as ‘the actions that increases utility the most for the most amount of people’, but can just as easily be ‘the actions that reduce your ARAE the most / fulfills your desires the most’, or can be ‘the actions that most follow the conventional understanding of good’, or can be ‘the most virtuous actions’, or can be ‘the actions leading to the survival and prosperity of an individual/society/idea’. The result is that you can discuss what is the optimal path towards a particular goal, leading everything to become an (in theory) solvable question. If the source of prescription is never defined, very often, people will move from defining a particular concept (often inaccurately) (e.g., human dislikes the experience of suffering) and then essentialize this feeling to claim that the source of the feeling is because humans in general think that the experience of suffering for anything anything with similar degree of experience is bad, and therefore you should care about the suffering of anything that suffers just as much as you care about your own suffering. One mistake that leads to this reasoning is that by thinking you have found a more ‘elegant’ or ‘unified’ explanation of a feeling (which is usually a simplification of low fidelity), then that you ‘should’ now change your actual feelings into that simplification of the feeling. Another mistake is thinking that by figuring out the ‘source’ of a particular feeling (though in this case, you would not have really found/proved the ultimate source of the feeling of why we dislike suffering: one might say we dislike our own suffering because we dislike suffering in general, but one may just as well say we dislike the suffering of others because we realize we dislike suffering ourselves and can see ourselves in others. In the general understanding of the word ‘source’–the ‘source’ that better explains why you have any feeling of dislike for suffering is mostly recognized to be evolutionary.), then you ought to prefer your personal generalization of the source to the feeling itself. Of course, both of these could be valid if you define your interpretation of prescription or of ‘should’ as adhering to more simplified or ‘unified’ explanations of things, or to adhere to the ‘sources or ultimate causes’ of things, but that is rarely what we mean. 

**‘Force Control’**: Ask Hanqi about force control. It is a way to prevent yourself from being anxious when you are engaged in a task by separating the time used to make decisions about ‘what to do’ apart from the time you use ‘to do’. 

**‘Sheer State’**: Ask Hanqi about sheer state. The state of mind that is useful to be in when figuring out ‘what to do’. It is almost always useful to ‘zoom out’ or consider things from a ‘logical’ or ‘objective’ frame of mind, attempting to remove as much manic or emotion as possible when making decisions or willing things. Sheer state should be employed as often as possible whenever there is an impetus to make decisions. An impetus to make decisions is when you feel a conflicting ARAE. You should enter a sheer state to prevent emotions from clouding your decision.

**‘Reduction to the unavoidable’**: We can ask all reasoning derivative beliefs, ‘why’, for what reason, because of what, we have this ARAE or this belief. We may find that particular reasons or assumptions for having this ARAE are flawed and do not align with our true experience. E.g., the experience of thinking that I need to immediately think about philosophy is due to / *because* the incorrect and experience contradicting assumption that I will obtain the ‘100% certain’ true answer if I just think a bit more, and the assumption that I ‘should’ be ‘100% certain’ about what it means to make a good decision before making any decision at all. Neither of these are proven to be correct assumptions to make, due to the fact that ‘should’ is not currently well defined, and from current epistemic knowledge, ‘100% certain’ is highly elusive and potentially impossible to obtain. 

### Addressing philosophical concerns about the proper way to reason about ARAE

In our philosophy, everything you ‘will’ should be in the effort to reduce your ARAE. One natural question to ask and reason about is “should we have this ARAE” or “what does this ARAE mean?”. However, we should be aware that this type of question is effective at reducing ARAE in general only for ‘reasoning-derivative’ and ‘avoidable’ parts of ARAE. The below is originally written in response to a materialist who believes in the objective world as the foundation of philosophy, in order to clarify objections and concerns but have been expanded to address common habits/mistakes when reasoning about ARAE. 

**Misunderstanding the meaning of ‘because’.** It is common to think that we experience certain ARAE ‘because’ of a certain line of reasoning. This is not true in many cases. For example, we generally do not have the ARAE of wanting to avoid getting my hand chopped off ‘because’ we have a concept of a ‘continuous self’ that will persist into the future and feel that pain. Even if we believe that experience is illusory and not continuous (according to certain materialist adjacent ideas), we nevertheless will still have that ARAE. If an ARAE/experience is ‘because’ of our belief in a particular reasoning chain, it means that if we take away the validity of that reasoning chain, then the experience caused by that reasoning chain will immediately disappear as well. 

**Misunderstanding the justification of moving to reduce an ARAE / Misapplication of Materialist Conclusions.** Most scientific inquiry operates based on the materialist assumptions, and conclusions that follow generally seem to not match some of our experiences, such as the experience of free will / persistent self identity. Nevertheless, it is tempting to use the conclusions from materialist world views to suppress certain ARAE. We have established previously that refined reasoning chains obtained from materialist world views cannot influence unavoidable or non-reasoning derivative ARAE/experiences, as they exist regardless of reason  (see ‘Reasoning-derivative and non-reasoning-derivative experiences’). However, there are many reasoning-dependent ARAE that make use of reasons less valid than that of most materialist world views in order to provide their justification. For example, one experience that is partially reasoning-dependent is the experience that we should care about the ARAE/experiences we predict we will experience in the future. While our experience of having ‘future experience’ depends directly on ARAE that are about the future (many of which are non-reasoning-derivative ARAE, such as the ARAE of not wanting to die violently in the future), it is possible that we make a logical generalization based on induction that we care in general about all of the ARAE that we predict we will have in the future. This means it is possible in principle to apply the reasoning chain from materialist world views in order to make it so that we care less about our experiences in the future, for example, our experiences 30 years into the future, which is an abstract concept that we have less non-reasoning-derivative ARAE for.   
We justified engaging in this materialistic investigations, for example, to fullfill the ARAE of curiousity, or due to the derivative ARAE that it is good to enhance our ability to predict the material world. But as with any action/thought, it is necessary to ask at this point, what justifies the application of the materialistic thought to reduce our caring about the future? While it is good in general to reduce the number of ARAE we have to worry about (e.g., can possibly get rid of caring about ARAE we predict we will care about), in reality, the application of this particular materialistic thought is difficult and does not help us align with ARAE in most circumstances. In general, materialism admits a mechanistic universe, which does not align with our unavoidable experience of free will, and the unavoidable feeling of the continuity of experience in the short term, *this is not by itself an issue since we can use compatabilist arguments to overcome the trigger of the ARAE to avoid cognitive dissonance*, but critically this leads to the incompatibility of materialist conclusions with many unavoidable ARAE that influence their alignment. Although not strong, one of our unavoidable experiences is our ability to imagine our future experience, and whenever we imagine our experience in the future, we experience some unavoidable ARAE of empasizing with what seems like the ARAE we experience in the future.   
By the materialist world view, the person we are 30 years from now (indeed, even 30 minutes from now) is no longer us (any more than, for example, someone from an alternative timeline), as there is no admissible way for us to quantify what counts as ‘us’ and what counts as ‘continuous experience’ – if we believe that our experience is due to the electrical activity in our brains (a common argument for this involves imagining what would happen if a perfect clone of you was made (with full memories), the argument for self becomes a game of defining continuity in terms of ‘similarity’ that has no end). However, attempting to put this fact into practice by our will is hard and will impede alignment with ARAE. For example, although we reason that we should not generalize experience absolutely, if we imagine our life 30 years from now, in destitution, we will feel an unavoidable ARAE of not wanting to be poor. Additionally, in the world we must experience currently, it is the case that everyone you meet and all the designs of social structure and physical structure make the assumption that a human should care about what their lives are 30 years from now. For example, your parents or friends or co-workers will react negatively to your assertion that you behave without caring about your future at all. All such experiences generate ARAE, and you additionally must deal with your unavoidable ARAE of caring about the future; this analysis makes the adoption of materialistic conclusions generally have a predictively net negative effect on your goal of aligning with ARAE and therefore unjustified. This is not to say however, that the discovery of materialistic conclusions has had no effect: the reasoning for the reasoning-derivate ARAE that we should care about all ARAE we predict we will experience in the future is no longer because we certain believe we will have future experience, but because acting as if we have future experience in the way we naturally experience aligns better with our goal of reducing ARAE. One should also note that depending on the structure of society in the future, and if we find out that our experience of caring about the future is not unavoidable, it may be possible to adopt the materialistic conclusions fully. Even now, one may have the justification of adopting them if one has a strong and *unavoidable* inborn desire to ‘will’ that our ‘unavoidable mental experience’ conforms to our approximate reasoning on ‘physical experience’, in some ways, this is even a heroic act.   
We must also note that while it is not justified to adopt some of its conclusions currently, the continued exploration of the materialistic world assumption is still justified by ARAE, as it may uncover more that may be helpful towards our goal of reducing ARAE. We should also note that recognizing that it does not align with ARAE to adopt materialistic philosophical conclusions does not preclude adopting conclusions of materialistic science. For example, materialistic science can tell us that washing hands is important due to bacteria; this new understanding only serves to benefit and align with our ARAE of not wanting to get sick and does not negatively influence other ARAE, and therefore it is an adoptable conclusion to think that bacteria exists.  
Of course, to justify the adoption of materialistic conclusions, the inborn desire referred to must be stronger and more unavoidable than that of other ARAE violated by the adoption of this logic. Otherwise, if it is easier to let go of the ARAE of adopting the conclusions of the materialistic world view (a reasoning-derivative ARAE), then it would be more efficient to do so.   

**Overestimating our ability to approximate ARAE with words.** ARAE are generally experiences that cannot be described using a finite number of words, concepts, ideas, or logical terms. It is common to engage in incorrect reasoning in order to ‘discover’ the ‘source’ of certain ARAEs. Trying to ask the question “should we have this ARAE” or “what does this ARAE mean logically in the material world” is a trap for parts of ARAE that are not reasoning-derivative (see prev sections). But clearly, this question is intelligible to most humans; so, what happens when you try ask the question “should we have this ARAE” and attempt to logically analyze why we should have ARAE? It is simply creating a confused version of ARAE stated in terms of logic and using it to see how well your actual ARAE aligns with its imperfect approximation.   
For example, if you ask yourself what does the ARAE “I would not like the experience of pain” mean logically, you may be tempted to try to understand through our current estimation of the material world, what is the definition of “I” and what is the definition of “experience”, and you will quickly find that it is relatively hard to pin down the exact meaning of these two words, and in fact, the concepts we feel to be “I” and “experience” don’t have clear definitions in the material world and cannot be described precisely via the material world (e.g., what happens to the concept of self and experience if you are wiped from existence and 8 clones of you are created in your place? How much should you care about each of them? If 8 clones are created, and one of them is killed vs if 1 clone is created, and it is killed, how *should* you feel?).   
One mistake here is the reasoning for asking the question (unless you are in an attempt to communicate the idea to someone else); if you successfully answer ‘what does this ARAE mean logically in terms of words’, what it gives you is merely an understanding/prediction of what the ARAE should tell you, but you already know what the ARAE will tell you by simply querying your feelings/experience – since ARAE are by definition feelings/experience – you know intuitively what your ARAE tell you. If the ARAE doesn’t tell you anything, that means the ARAE does not apply in that case (you have no existing feelings about that case). Then you may ask, well, shouldn’t the result of answering the question still be the same as what you feel? Why does it seem to give another answer? This is because in order to interpret a feeling logically, you must essentialize what that feeling is by making an imperfect interpretation of that feeling that means something logically, and that operation is inherently flawed. I.e., we make the mistake of thinking the material world captures some aspect of our experience perfectly, where in fact it is simply an approximate model we have made in order to explain and predict our future experience.   
In conclusion, it is in general more useful to ask questions like “how can I predict when I will have this ARAE in the future”, “should I make decisions that benefit this ARAE or some other ARAE”, but it is usually less useful for aligning with ARAE to ask “should we have this ARAE” (for unavoidable ARAEs/experiences). Unavoidable and non-reasoning-derivative ARAE/motivations/desires do not need to be justified, they simply exist, and it is the target of our philosophy and decisions to align with them. 